Emitting new data is arguably the most important thing observables do and in I'd say 99% of all
cases, when you subscribe,
you'll pass that first argument where you are interested in the data you are getting
or maybe it's 90% because there is one other important use case too, especially when we think
about things like HTTP requests and that is error handling. This counter here can't fail,
there is no error that could occur here
but that's a different story
if you're sending HTTP request which we will later do. So here of course we can also fake an error,
we can simply throw one and define our own condition when we want to do that.
Now to do that, we could for example check if count is greater than three,
so if that occurs, then we'll first of all still emit that new data with the next method but then
we'll also use the error method to throw a new error here.
So here, I'll create a new error object, count is greater three, which of course is a horrible event that
definitely is worth an error.
Now if we do that and I save everything, let's see what happens,
it starts counting again and as soon as we exceed three, we get an error here right,
we get our error that
we defined and you see that the observable now stops emitting.
It actually gives us four which makes sense because that's the last value it emits
before this condition is true but there are no other values emitted because whenever an observable throws
an error, it cancels, it's done,
it will not emit any other values, it dies
so to say and therefore in that case, you also don't need to unsubscribe.
You still can unsubscribe if you navigate away,
you'll not get an error but it's not necessary because it was dead anyways but you might not have
known that when you unsubscribed,
so unsubscribing is not an issue.
Now this is how you can throw an error
and of course, it's more important to not just throw them, that most of the time will be done for you
when you're using some built-in Angular functionality that can fail, like HTTP requests but it's important
to know how to handle that and for that, you can pass another argument to subscribe.
Thus far, we passed the first argument which is this data function,
the second argument would be our function that gets called when an error occurs and we'll get the error
as an argument there.
Now of course the simplest thing we can do here is that we log that error to the console but obviously
you could do way more than that,
you could send it to your own back-end and store it in a database there, you can show an error message
and alert to the user.
Let's actually do that,
let's show an alert and let's show the error message here in the alert.
So that's what we're doing here,
we're logging it to the console, we're showing an alert and now it starts counting again and as soon as
we exceed three,
here you go,
now we get our alert and you see we don't have that red error here on the right anymore,
instead it's now a regular console log because that's what we're doing.
So now we're handling that error and that of course is also an important part. Now handling errors is
nice
but what about completing the observable? I told you that throwing an error actually cancels the
observable and lets it die
but completing it is something different,
completing can be a normal process in an observable. Now our interval by default doesn't complete, it
will emit new values until the end of time and HTTP requests on the other hand will complete,
it completes whenever a response by the server is there
and of course here when we're building our own observable from the ground up, we can also complete
this manually. In the end,
we are defining how our observable behaves, our event source is the set interval
we have wrapped in our observable and therefore before we throw an error let's say, we can also add another
condition, say if count is equal to two,
well then we simply call observer complete and there, you don't need to pass any arguments. Now when you
call complete, the observable will really come to a halt and you can see that if you now reload, it logs
zero, it logs one, it logs two and that's it, doesn't log anything else, doesn't reach our error condition
because we complete the observable before it gets there and that is important to understand and
to keep in mind, whenever an observable completes, it really is done,
there are no other values emitted thereafter, which kind of makes sense because it completed.
Now if you want to react to that completion, you can add a third arguments to the subscribe method and
that is your completion handler function.
It's a function that gets no arguments because completing doesn't pass any arguments and it's simply
a function where you can do some cleanup work or whatever you need to do
and here I'll just log completed. Also important,
you don't need to unsubscribe
if your observable did complete but again, you might not know that here in ngOnDestroy
so you can still do that without getting errors. So if I reload,
now we see our logs again and after the two, we see completed. Now also worth noting though and important
to keep in mind,
you might think that complete, so that complete function here also fires when you're getting an error,
after all the observable does finish after throwing an error,
right?
Well that's not the case.
If we change the complete condition here temporarily to let's say to 5 let's say
and therefore, this will happen after this condition which actually will throw an error,
you will see something that might surprise you.
We see our normal output here and then we get that error
and that's it.
What you don't see anywhere is our completed log,
so this here never gets logged and that's just one important characteristic you have to keep in mind
about observables. When it cancels due to an error, then that's a different thing than when it completes.
An error cancels the observable,
it does not complete it, technically in both cases, no new values are emitted but regarding the functions
that get called here, there is a difference.